# Human Interface Devices
> A **Human Interface Device** (HID) is a type of computer device that interacts directly with, and most often takes input from, humans and may deliver output to humans.

## Interfacing
Game software reads and writes HID inputs and outputs in various ways, depending on the specific design of the device in question.

- Getting the Device State
Inputs (e.g. buttons) and other information (connection, errors etc.).

- Writing to the device
Rumble / LEDs etc.

Many game engines provide high-level APIs, enabling normalization of input data.

## Polling
> Querying the state of the device once per game loop iteration.

Used for Simple devices (game pads, old-school joysticks).

- Reading input
Reading hardware registers directly, reading a memory-mapped I/O port,
or via a higher-level software interface.

- Writing output
Writing to special registers or memory-mapped I/O addresses, or via a
higher-level API.

**Characteristics**
- Minimal amount of source code needed
- Application is required to query frequently enough
- APIs are typically unique to the hardware

>Interfacing is the general concept of how a game communicates with an input/output device. Polling on the other hand is one specific technique for interfacing with a device.

## Input Types
- Digital values
- Analog values (absolute or relative)
- Complex data

### Digital
Digital buttons have 2 states: *Pressed (1)* and *Not Pressed (0)*.
```       
while (true)
{
    uiButtonStateOld = uiButtonState;
    uiButtonState = readButtonInput();
    uiButtonTrigger = ( uiButtonStateOld ^ uiButtonState ) & uiButtonState;
    uiButtonRelease = ( uiButtonStateOld ^ uiButtonState ) & uiButtonStateOld;
}
```

### Analog
> An analog input is one that can take on a range of values.

It usually is digitized, meaning it is quantized and represented using
an integer in software.
Input values can be absolute or relative, e.g.
- **Analog stick** → absolute (zero values if the stick is not tilted)
- **Mouse** → relative (non-zero values represent a movement delta)

Character movement: The movement speed needs to be mapped to the length of the vector.
Because HIDs are analog devices, the voltage produced is noisy, and the actual
inputs we observe may fluctuate slightly.

➡️ A **dead zone** is any area of a control interface that has no input effect.
The dead zone must be wide enough to account for the noisiest inputs generated by an
undisturbed control, but small enough not to interfere with the player’s sense of the HID’s
responsiveness.

### Complex Data
An audio or video feed or motion tracking info might be used to interface with a game (e.g. kinect).

## Runtime Implementation
A game engine’s HID system usually provides some or all of the following features:
- Dead zones
- Analog signal filtering
- Event detection (e.g., button up, button down)
- Detection of button sequences and multi-button combinations (known as chords)
- Gesture detection
- Management of multiple HIDs for multiple players
- Multiplatform HID support
- Controller input re-mapping
- Context-sensitive inputs
- The ability to temporarily disable certain inputs

### Detecting Input Events

#### Chords
> A **chord** is a group of buttons that, when pressed at the same time, produce a unique behavior in the game.
    ==> Watch the states of two or more buttons and only perform the requested operation when all of them are down.

#### Gestures
> A gesture is a sequence of actions performed via a HID by the player over a period of time.
     
Generally implemented by keeping a brief history of the HID actions performed by the player

**Rapid Button Tapping**
We can detect the frequency of a button press by simply keeping track of the last time we saw a button-down event.

**Multibutton Sequence**
Keeping the sequence with an array of button ids.

**Thumb Stick Rotation**
Dividing the two-dimensional range of possible stick positions into quadrants.

### Input Mapping
> A table maps each physical or abstract control index to a logical function in the game.
Controls are grouped into a few classes:
- *Digital buttons*
    * All states packed into a 32-bit word, one bit per button
    * Or one floating-point value per button, which either is 0 or 1
- *Unidirectional absolute axes (e.g., triggers, analog buttons)*
    * Produce floating-point input values in the range [0, 1]
- *Bidirectional absolute axes (e.g., joy sticks)*
    * Produce floating-point input values in the range [-1, 1]
- *Relative axes (e.g., mouse axes, wheels, track balls)*
    * Produce floating-point input values in the range [-1, 1] , where ±1 represents the maximum relative offset possible within a single game frame

### Context-Sensitive Controls
- A physical control can have different functions, depending on context, e.g.
    * The ubiquitous “use” button (pick up, open, talk, …)
    * Modal control scheme (walking, driving, …)

- Determining the right context can be tricky, e.g.
    * Standing between a weapon and a health pack
    * Some games implement a priority system to break ties

- Subtle context sensitivity, e.g.
    * Character walking in a direction relative to the camera angle