# Game Objects
> A game world is typically comprised of numerous discrete elements (*game objects*).

## Static Elements
> Anything that doesn’t move or interact with gameplay in an active way.

Terrain, buildings, roads, bridges, etc.

## Dynamic Elements
> Elements that can move / change during runtime.

States of the dynamic elements, changes over time:
- Location, orientation and internal states
- Updated by various gameplay systems

Characters, vehicles, weaponry, floating power-ups and health packs, collectible objects, particle
emitters, dynamic lights, invisible regions used to detect important events in the game, splines that
define the paths of objects...

Dynamic elements of a game are usually designed in an object-oriented fashion (*type* = an object, *instance* = one concrete instantiation).
They consist of:
- **Attributes**
The current state of the object.
- **Behaviors**
How the state changes over time and in response to events.

### Levolution
> Static elements replaced with Dynamic Elements, which then become static again.

## Game State
> The term game state refers to the current state of all dynamic game world elements, taken as a whole.

The ratio of dynamic to static elements varies from game to game.
Distinction between the dynamic and static elements is a bit blurry.

Distinction serves primarily as an *optimization tool*:
- Vertices of a static triangle mesh can be specified in world space
- Lighting can be precomputed, in the form of static vertex lighting, light maps, shadow maps, static ambient occlusion information, basically anything

<br>

---

<br>

## Object Centric Design
> Each game object is represented by a single class instance or a small collection of interconnected instances.
- Each object has a set of attributes and behaviours that are encapsulated within its class (or classes).
- The game world is just a collection of game objects

### Composition > Inheritance
> Composition → *"has-a"* relationship instead of Inheritance → *"is-a"* relationship.

## Property Centric Design
> Think primarily in terms of the attributes (e.g. the behavior), rather than the objects. Each game object is represented only by a unique id, the properties of each game object are distributed across many data tables, one per property type, and keyed by object id.
- The properties themselves are often implemented as instances of hard-coded classes
- The behavior of a game object is implicitly defined by the collection of properties from which it is composed.
- A property-centric design is more akin to a relational database than an object model

### Advantages
- Tends to be more memory efficient, because we need only store attribute data that is actually in use
- It's easier to construct such a model in a data-driven manner
- Can be more cache-friendly than an object-centric model, because data of the same type is stored contiguously in memory
- struct of arrays vs. array of structs

### Disadvantages
- It's more difficult to enforce relationships between properties
- It can be hard to implement a desired large-scale behavior merely by cobbling together the fine-grained behaviors of a group of property objects.
- It's trickier to debug such systems
    * A game object's properties can not be inspected all at once in the watch window of the debugger

## Properties vs Components
- Property objects are very closely related to components
    * A single logical game object is made up of multiple sub-objects
    * The main distinction lies in the roles of the sub-objects
- Property-centric design
    * Each sub-object defines a particular attribute of the game object itself
    * E.g., health, visual representation, inventory, a particular magic power, etc.
- Component-based (object-centric) design
    * The sub-objects often represent linkages to particular low-level engine subsystems
    * E.g. renderer, animation, collision and dynamics, etc.